INTRODUCING EC2: Elastic Compute Cloud
* Secure, resizable compute capacity in the Cloud
** LIke a VM, hosted in AWS
** Designed to make web-scale cloud computing easier for AWS_Certified_Developer_Associate
** The capacity you want, when you need Integrates
** You are in complete control of your own instances

Why is it so cool?
  Game changer. Big change in the industry.
  Pay only for what you use. Changed the economics of computing.
  No wasted capacity. Select the capacity that you need right now. Grow and shrink when you need.`

Before EC2 
  On Prem infrastructure, estimate capacity. Long term investment, 3-5 years.
  Typically would overspecify to accomodate growth.

Wait minutes, not months!

EC2 Pricing Options
  On Demand: Pay by the hour or second depending on the type of instance.
    Flexible: Low cost and flexibility of ec2 without any up-front payment or long-term commitment
    Short-term: Applications with short-term, spiky, or unpredicatable workloads that cannot be interrupted
    Testing teh water: Applications being developed or tested on Amazon Ec2 for the first time.
  Reserved: Reserved capacity for one or three years. up to 72% discount on the hourly charge. Regional.
    Predictable Usage: Applications with steady state or predictable usage.
    Specific Capacity Requirements: Applications that require reserved capacity
    Pay Up front
    Standard RIs: Up to 72% off on-demand price. 
    Convertible RIs: Has the option to change to a different reserved instance type of equal or greater vale.
    Scheduled RIs: Launch within a time window you define. Match your capacity reservation to a preditable recurring schedule that only requires a fraction of a day, week, or month.
  Spot: Purchase unused capacity at a discount of up to 90%. Prices fluctuate with supply and demand.
  Dedicated: A physical Ec2 server, dedicated for your use. The most expensive option.

  Savings Plans
    1. Save up to 72%
    2. Commit to one or three years to use a specific amount of compute power.
    3. Super flexible, includes serverless Lambda and Fargate

Exploring EC2 Instance Types
  1. Hardware - When you launch an instance, the instance type determines the hardware of the host ocmputer used for your instance
  2. Capabilities - Each instance type offers different compute, memory and storage capabilities and are grouped in instance families
  3. Application Requirements - Select an instance type based on the requirements of the application you plan to run.

A wide selection - Instance types are optimized to fit different use cases and give you flexibility.

Launching an EC2 Instance

What are EBS Volumes? Elastic Block Store
  Elastic Block Store: Storage volumes that you can attach to your EC2 instances.

  Think of them as a disk in your laptop or computer. When you launch an EC2, it has at least one EBS as example Amazon Linux.

  Use them the same way you would use any system disk.
    Create a file system.
    Run a database.
    Run an operating system.
    Store data.
    Install applications
  
  Mission Critical
    1. Production Workloads: Designed for mission critical workloads
    2. Highly available: Automatically replicated within a single Availability Zone to portect against hardware failures.
    3. Scalable: Dynamically increase capacity and change the type of volume with no downtime or performance impact to your live systems.

  Types of EBS:
    1. General Purpose SSD (GP2): Balance of price and performance.
      3 IOPS per GiB, up to a maximum of 16000 IPOS per volume
      gp2 volumes smaller than 1 TB can burst up to 3000 IOPS
    2. Provisioned IOPS SSD (io1): Performance and most expensive option.
      If you need more than 16000 IOPS
      Designed for I/O intensive applications, large databases and latency sensitive operations
    3. Provisioned IOPS SSD (io2): Latest generation, higher durability and more IOPS per GiB
      Same price as io1, io1 will probably be decomissioned.
      500 IOPS per GiB
      Up to 64000 IOPS
      99.999% durability instead of 99.9%
    4. Throughput Optimized HDD (st1): Low-cost HDD volume
      Baseline throughput of 40MB/s per TB
      Ability to burst up to 250 MB/s per TB
      Maximum throughput of 500 MB/s per volume
      Frequently accessed, throughput-intensive workloads
      Big Data, data warehouses, ETL, and log processing
      Cannot be a boot volume
    5. COLD HDD (SC1): Lowest cost Options
      Baseline throughput of 12 MB/s per TB
      Ability to burst up to 80 MB/s per TB
      Max throughput of 250 MB/s per volume
      A good choice for colder data requiring fewer scans per day.
      Good for applications that need the lowest cost and performances is not a factor.
      Cannot be a boot volume

    IOPS versus Throughput?
      IOPS:
        Measures the number of read and write operations per second
        Important metric for quick transactions, low latency apps, transactional workloads.
        The ability to action reads and writes very quickly.
        Choose provisioned IOPS SSD (io1 or io2)
      Throughput:
        Measures the number of bits read or written per second (MB/s)
        Important metric for large datasets, large I/O sizes, complex queries
        The ability to deal with large datasets
        Choose Throughput Optimized HDD (st1)

  Elastic Block Store LAB
    Highly available and scalable storage volumes you can attach to an EC2 instance
    
    Encrypted snapshotes: If you create an EBS volume from an encrypted snapshot, then you will get an encrypted volume
    Unencrypted snapshotes: If you create an EBS volume from an unencrypted snapshot, then you will get an unencrypted volume

  Elastic Load Balancer
    Simply, helps us balance our load over multiple servers.

  Types of Load Balancers
    Application Load Balancer: Best suited for load balancing of HTTP and HTTPS traffic. They operate at layer 7 and are application-aware. 
    They are intelligent and you can create advanced request routing, sending specified requests to specific web servers.

    Network Load Balancer: Best suited for load balancing of TCP traffic where extreme performance is required. Operating at connection level (Layer 4).
    NLBs are capable of handling millions of requests per second, while maintaining ultra-low latencies.

    Classic Load Balancer: Legacy Elastic load Balancer. You can load balance HTTP/HTTPS and use layer 7-specific features, such as X-Forwarded and sticky sessions.
    You can also use strict Layer 4 load balancing for applications that rely purely on the TCP protocol.

    If your application stops responding, teh ELB responds with a 504 error.
      THis means that the application is having issues. This could be either at the web server layer or at the database layer.
      Identify where the application is failing, and scale it up or out where possible.
      Think of a Gateway timeout error.

    X-Forwarded-For Header
      User(124.12.3.231) -> ELB (10.0.0.23) -> EC2 (10.0.0.23). How to get IPV4? X-Forwarded-For header.

    ELB Exam Tips
      3 Types of load Balancers
      504 error indicates the gateway has timed out. The application is not responding within the idle timeout period.
        Troubleshoot the application. Is it the web server or database?
      If you need the IPV4 address, look for the X-Forwarded-For header.

    ROUTE 53 LAB

    Route 53 Examp Tips
      Route53 is Amazon's DNS service.
      Allows you to map your domain names to 
        Ec2 instances
        Load Balancers
        S3 Buckets

      Register domain name

      Manage DNS Record sets
        Look up DNS record sets:
        Alias Target: S3 website, ELB, CloudFront, Elastic Beanstalk

      CLI Tips 
        Least Privilege - Always give your users the minimum amount of access required.
        Create Groups - Assign your users to groups. Your users will automatically inherit the permissions of the group.
        Secret Access Key - You only see this once. If you do not save it, you can delete the key pair.
        Do not use just one access key.

EC2 with S3 Role Lab
  Grant permissions to entities that you trust, example EC2 access to S3.
  Go to IAM, create or choose a role.

  Create Role
    1. Choose AWS Service or another aws account, web identity, etc.
    2. Attach permissions policies (Minimum required is recommended)
    3. Attach IAM role to EC2 instance, no need to stop/reboot, but you may need to remove access key.

  EXAM Tips
  * Roles allow you to not use access key ID's and secret access keys
  * Roles are preferred form a security perspective
  * Roles are controlled by policies
  * You can change a policy on a role and it will take immediate affect
  * You can attach and detach roles to running EC2 instances without having to stop or terminate these instances

RDS 101
  What is a relational database?
    Relational databases are what most of us are all used to. 
  
  RDS Types
    SQL server
    Oracle
    MySQL server
    PostgreSQL
    Aurora
    MariaDB

  Non Relational databases
    database
      collection=Table
      document=Row
      key value pairs=Fields

    Example: JSON/NoSQL

  What is Data Warehousing?
    Used for business intelligence. 
    Used to pull in very large and complex data sets. Usually used by management to do queires on data.

  OLTP vs OLAP
    Online Transaction Processing (OLTP) differs from OLAP online analytics processing (OLAP) in terms of the types of queries you will run.

  What is Elasticache?
    ElastiCache is a web service that makes it easy to deploy, operate, and scale an in-memory cache in the cloud.
    The service improves the performance of web applications by allowing you to retrieve information from fast, managed,
    in-memory caches, instead of relying entirely on slower disk-based databases.

    ElastiCache supports two open-source in-memory caching engines:
      1. Memcached
      2. Redis

  AWS Database Types
    RDS - OLTP
    DynamoDB - No SQL
    Redshift - OLAP
    Elasticache - In Memory Caching: 
      Memcached
      Redis

RDS Lab
  Aurora is not available on free tier.
  Choose database.
  Set credentials
  Choose size
  Availability & Durability not available on free tier.
  Connectivity (VPC)
  Create or choose secruity groups

  EC2 - Bootstrap Script - Runs a root level and executes commands in chronological order.
    EXAMPLE
    
    #!/bin/bash  
    yum install httpd php php-mysql -y  
    yum update -y  
    chkconfig httpd on  
    service httpd start  
    echo "<?php phpinfo();?>" > /var/www/html/index.php
    cd /var/www/html  
    wget https://s3.amazonaws.com/acloudguru-production/connect.php

  Configure security groups and launch

RDS - Back Ups, Multi-AZ & Read Replicas
  Automated Backups
    There are two different types of backups for AWS: Automated Backups and Database snapshotes
    Automated backups allow you to recover your database to any point in time within a retention period.
    The retention period can be between one and 35 days. Automated backups will take a daily snapshot and will also 
    store transaction logs throughout the day. When you do a recovery, AWS will choose the most recent daily back up and then apply
    transaction logs relevant to that day. This allows you to do a point in time recovery down to a second, within the retention period.

    Automated backups are enabled by default. The backup data is stored in S3 and you get free storage space equal to the size of your database.
    Backups are taken within a defined window. 
    During the backup window, storage I/O may be suspended while your data is being backed up and you may experience elevated latency.

  Snapshots
    DB Snapchosts are done manually (user initiated). They are stored even after you delete the original RDS instance, unlike automated backups.

  Restoring Backups
    Whenever you restore either an Automatic Backup or a manual snapshot, the restored version of the database will be a new RDS instance with a new DNS endpoint.

  Encryption
    Encryption at rest is supported for all RDS. Encryption is done using the AWS Key Managment Service.
    (Check out Security course)
    Once your RDSD instance is encrypted, the data stored at rest in the underlying storage is encrypted, as are its automated backups, read replicas, and snapshots.
    At the present time, encrypting an existing DB is not available. To use RDS encryption for an existing database, you must first create a snapshot, make a copy of that snapshot and encrypt the copy.

  What is Multi-AZ RDS?
    Multi-AZ allows you to have an exact copy of your production database in another AZ. AWS handles the replication for you, 
    so when your production database is written to, this write will automatically be synchronized to the stand by database.

    In the event of planned database maintenance, DB instance failure, or an AZ failure, RDS will automatically failover to the standby so that database operations can resume quickly without adminsitrative intervention.

    Multi-AZ is for disaster recovery only!!!
      It is not primarily used for improving performance. For performance improvement, you need read replicas.

    Multi-AZ Databases Available for
      SQL server
      Oracle
      MySQL server
      PostgreSQL
      MariaDB

  What is a read replica?
    Writes to database are go to one database, but there are multiple copies for EC2 instances to read from.

    Read replicas allow you to have a read-only copy of your production database. This is achieved by using Async replication from the primary RDS instance
    to read replica. You use read replicas primarily for very read-heavy database workloads.

  Read Replica Databases are Available for
    MySQL
    PostgreSQL
    MariaDB
    Aurora

  Read replicas are used for scaling performance, not for disaster recovery.

  Must have automatic backups turned on in order to deploy a read replica.

  You can have up to 5 read replica copes of any database.
  You can have read replicas of read replicas, but watch out for latency.
  Each read replica will have its own DNS end point.
  You can have read replicas that have multi-AZ
  You can create read replicas of Multi-AZ source databases.
  Read replicas can be promoted to be their own databases. This breaks the replication. 
  You can have a read replica in a second region.

  RDS Backups and Snapshots
    Types of RDS Backup
      Database Snapshot: Manual, ad hoc, and user-initiated
        Provides a snapshot of theh storage volume attached to the DB instance
      Automated Backup: Enabled by default
        Creates daily backups or snapshots that run during a backup window that you define. Transaction logs are used to replay transactions.

    RDS Automated Backup: A lot more bang for your buck
      Point-in-time recovery: recover your database to any point in time within a "retention period" of 1-35 days
      Full daily backup: RDS takes a full daily backup or snapshot and also stores transaction logs throughout the day.
      The recovery process: When you do a recovery, AWS will first choose the most recent daily backup and then apply transaction logs to that day, up to the recovery point.

      1. Stored in S3
      2. Free Stroage: You get free storage space equal to the size of your database.
      3. Defined Backup Window: During the backup window, storage I/O may be suspendd for a few seconds while the backup process intializes, and you may experience increased latency at this time.

    Database Snapshots
      Not Automated: DB Snapshtos are done manually
      No Retention Period: Manual snapshots are nto deleted after you delete the original RDS instance, including any automated backups
      Backup to a known state: Back up your DB instance in a known state as frequently as you wish, and then restore that specific state at any time.

    Restoring your RDS Database
      The restored version will always be a new RDS instance with a new DNS endpoint!!!

    Encryption at Rest
      Enabling Encryption: Enable encryption at creation time by selecting the encryption option in the console.
      Integrated with KMS: Enryption is done using the AWS Key Management Service (KMS) service. AES-256 encryption.
      Includes all DB storage: Includes the underlying storage, automated backups, snapshots, and read replicas. 
      You can't enable encryption on an unencrypted RDS DB instance

      If you have an unencrypted DB that you want to encrypt:
        1. Take a snapshot
        2. Create an encrypted snapshot
        3. Restore that snapshot to an encrypted DB

    Backups vs Snapshots Exam Tips
      Automated backups
        Automated by default
        Daily backup, consisting of a point in time snapshot plus transaction logs
        Retention period of 1-35 days
        Can be used to recover your database to any point in time within the retention period

      DB Snapshot
        User-initieated, ad-hoc
        Point in time snapshot only
        No retention period, stored indefinitely.
        Used to back up your DB instance to a known state and restore to that specific state at any point in time

      RDS Encryption
        Enable at Creation, applies to all underlying storage
        KMS Integration, AES-256 encryption
        Existing RDS instances: Take a snapshot, encrypt snapshot, create new rds instance from the encrypted snapshot

Introducing Systems Manager Parameter Store
  You need a way to store parameters used by your applications. For example, license keys, database connection information, username/passwords
  This information needs to be passed to your EC2 instances as a bootstrap script
  You need to maintain the confdienctiality of the information and avoid hard coding parameters in your code

  Store Confidential information
  Plain Text or Encrypted (using KMS)
  Reference your parameters using the paramter name
  Integrated with AWS Services (EC2, CloudFormation, Lmabda, CodeBuild, CodePipeline and CodeDeploy)

Elasticache 101
  What is Elasticache?
    See above.

  Amazon ElastiCache can be used to significantly improve latency and throughput for many read-heavy application workloads or compute-intensive workloads.

  Caching improves applicaiton performance by storing critical pieces of data in memory for low-latency access. 
  Cached information may include the results of I/O-intensive database queries or the results of computationally intensive calculations

  Types of Elasticache
    Memcahed: A widely adopted memory object caching system. Elasticache is protocol compliant with memcached, so popular tools that you use today with existing memcached environments will work seamlessly with the service.
    Redis: A popular open-source in-memory key-value store that supports data structures such as sorted sets and lists.
            Elasticache supports master/slave replication and multi-az which can e used to achieve cross AZ redundancy.

  Be sure to look at Redis vs Memcached use cases, strengths and weaknesses.
    
AWS CLI Pagination
  You can control the number of items included in the output whne you run a CLI command.
  By default, the AWS CLI uses a page size of 1000
  --page-size
  --max-items

EC2 Summary
  EC2 is like a VM that is hosted in AWS instead of your data center
    Select the capacity that you need right now
    Grow and shrink when you need
    Pay for waht you use
    Wait minutes, not months

  EC2 Instance Pricing Option
    On Demand: Pay by the hour or second depending on thhe type of instance you run. Great for flexibility.
    Reserved: Reserve capacity for one or three years. Up to 72% discount on the hourly charge. Great if you have known, fixed requirements.
    Spot: Purchase unused capacity at a discount of up to 90%. Prices fluctuate with supply and demand. Great for applications with flexible start and end times.
    Dedicated: A physical EC2 server dedicated for your use. Great if you have server-bound licenses to reuse or complicance requirements.

    Instance Type Determinse the hardware
      Each instance type offers different compute, memory, and storage capabilities. These types are grouped in instance families.
      Select an instance type based on the requirements of your application.

    Creating an EBS Volumes
      Highly avaialabe and scalabe storage volumes you can attach to an EC2 instance
      Elastic Block Store - SSD Volumes
        GP2: General Purpose SSD, suitable for boot disks and general applications. Up to 16000 IOPS per volume, up to 99.9% durability.
        IO1: Provisioned IOPS ssd, suitable for OLTP and latency-sensitive applications. 50IOPS/GiB. Up to 64000 IOPS per volume. High performance. More expensive than gp2, up to 99.9% durability
        IO2: Provisioned IOPS SSD, latest generation provisioned IOPS volume. Suitable for OLTP and latency sensitive applications. 500 IOPS/GIB, up to 64000 IOPS per volume. 99.999% durability

      Elastic Block Store - HDD Volumes
        ST1: Throughput optimized HDD, sutiable for big data, data warehouses, ETL. Max throughput is 500 MB/s per volume. Cannot be a boot volume. Up to 99.9% durability.
        SC1: Cold HDD, max throughput of 250 MB/s per volume. Less-frequently accessed data. Cannot be a boot volume. Lowest cost, up to 99.9% durability

      EBS Snapshots:
        A point in time copy of an EBS volume. Great for backing up EBS volumes. You can use a snapshot to create a new EBS volume
        Encrypted Snapshots: If you create a new EBS volume from an encrypted snapshot, then you will get an encrypted volume.
        Unencrypted Snapshot: If you create a new EBS volume from an unencrypted snapshot, then you will get an unencrypted volume.

    Elastic Load Balancer
      Application Load Balancers
        Intelligent load balancing for HTTP/HTTPS. Routes requests to a specific web server based on the request type.

      Network Load Balancers
        Provides high-performance load balancing for TCP traffic

      Classic Load Balancer
        Legacy option that supports both HTTP/HTTPS and TCP. May still be on exam.

      Gateway Load Balancers
        Provides load balancing for third-party vritual applicances

      X-Forwarded-For If you need the IPv4 address of your end user, look for the X-Forwarded-For HTTP header

      504 error: Gateway Timeout
        The application is not responding within the timeout period. Troublesoot your application or database server.

    Route 53: Amazon's DNS service
      Map a Domain Name
        EC2 instance
        Elastic Load Balancer
        S3 Bucket

      EC2 -> Elastic Load Balancer -> Hosted Zone with Alias and A record to map domain name to Application Load Balancer

      Terminology
        Hosted Zone - A container for DNS records for your domain.
        Alias - Allows you to route traffic addressed to the zone apex, or the top fo the DNS namespace and send it to a resource within AWS such as an Elastic Load Balancer
        A Record - Allows you to route traffic to a resource such as a web server using an IPv4 address

    AWS CLI
      Least Privilege: Always give your users the minimum amount of access required to do their job
      Use Groups: Create IAM groups and assign your users to groups
      Group permissions are assigned using IAM policy documents
      Users will automatically inherit the permissions of the group.

      Secret Access Key: You will only see this once. If you lose it, you will need to delete and create a new key
      Don't share your key pairs!

      Supports Linux, Windows, MacOS

    Using Roles with EC2
      Roles can be used to give ec2 instances access to aws resources
      Create an IAM role
      Create an Ec2 instance, attach the role to the ec2

      Preferred Option, avoid hard coding your credentials

      IAM Policies are used to control a role's permissions

      Immediate updates
      Attach and detach policies without terminating the instance.

    RDS
      RDS Database Types
        SQL Server, Oracle, MySQL, PostgreSQL, MariaDB, Amazon Aurura
      RDS is ofr OLTP Workloads
        Great for proessing lots of small transactions, like customer orders, banking transactions, payments, booking systems
      Not Suitable for OLAB
        Use Redshift for OLAP and data warehousing tasks like analzying large amounts of data, reporting, and sales forecasting

      Automated Backup
        Automated, enabled by default, you define the backup window.
        Point in time snapshot plus transaction logs
        Retention period of up to 35 days
        Can be used to recover your database to any point in time within the retention period
      Database Snapshots
        User intitiated, ad-hoc
        Point int ime period, stored indefinitely
        Used to back up your db instance to a knwon state and restore to that specific state at any time

      Encryption
        Enable at Creation: Includes all underlying storage, automated backups, snapshots, etc
        KMS Integration: Uses the AWS Key Management Service for AES-256 bit encryption
        Existing RDS Instances: take a snapshot, encrypt the snapshot, create an encrypted instance from the snapshot

      Multi-AZ
        An exact copy of your production database in another Availability Zone
        Used in Disaster Recovery
        In the event of a failure, RDS will automatically failover to the standby instance

      Read Replica
        A read-only copy of your primary database in the same AZ, cross-AZ or cross-region
        used to increase or scale read performance
        Great for read-hevy workloads and takes the load off your primary databsae for read-only workloads

      Elasticache is an in-memory cache designed to improve read perforamnce for read-heavy databases
        Memcached
          In-memory, key-value data store
          Object caching is your primary global
          You want to keep things as simple as possible
          You don't need persistence or Multi-AZ
          You don't need to support advanced data types or sorting.

        Redis
          In-memory, key-vlaue data store
          You are performing data sorting and ranking
          You have advanced data types, such as lists and hashes.
          You need data persistence
          You need multi-AZ 

      Parameter Store
        Store Confidential Information: Passwords, connections trings, etc
        Plain Text or Encrypted
        Reference your parameters using the aprameter name
        Integrated with AWS Services

Lab: Using EC2 Roles and Instance Profiles in AWS