What is KMS?
    AWS Key Management service

    1. managed
        Managed service that makes it easy for you to create and control the encryption keys used to encrypt your data
    2. Integrated 
        Seamlessly integrated with many AWS services to make encrypting data in those services as easy as checking a box
    3. Simple

When do we use KMS?
    Whenever you are dealing with sensitive information

    Sensitive data that you want to keep secret
    Customer data
    Financial data
    Database Passwords 
    Secrets
    Credentials

Integrates well with most services including:
    S3
    RDS
    DynamoDB
    Lambda
    EBS
    EFS
    CloudTrail
    Developer Tool

What is a CMK?
    Customer Master Key: Encrypt/decrpyt data up to 4KB
    What is it used for?
        Generate/Encrypt/Decrypt the Data Key

    Data Key
        Used to encrypt/decrypt your data

    Envelop Encryption!

Creating a CMK - DEMO
    Go to IAM
    Create users that can use and managed the key
    Create group - MY KMS GROUP
    Go to KMS
    Create a Key
        Symmetric: Single key for encrypt/decrypt
        Assymetric: Public/Private Key pair

    Advanced Options:
        Key material origin:
            KMS
            External
            Custom key store (CloudHSM)

    Create an alias
    Choose users that can use the key
        
CMK Summary
    CMK Attributes
        alias
        creation date
        description
        key state
        key material
        stays inside kms: can never be exported

KMS Exam Tips
    Set Up CMK
        Create alias and description
        Give it a description
        Choose Key material

        Key Administrative permissions
            IAM users and roles that can administer the key through the kms api

        Key Usage Permissions
            IAM users and roles that can use the key to encrpyt and decrypt data

    AWS-Managed CMK: AWS-provided and aws-managed cmk. Used on your behalf with the AWS services integrated with KMS
    Customer-managed CMK: You create, own, and managed yourself

    Data Key: Encryption key that is used encrypt/decrypt large amounts of data

Understanding KMS API Calls
    Architecture Overview
        Create EC2
            AWS CLI
                KeyUser

        Create secret.txt
        Use MYCMK to encrypt/decrpty

        Employ key rotation as well

Exploring Envelope Encryption
    A process for encrypting your data. It applies to files > 4 KB

    Encryption Process:
    AWS KMS -> GenerateDataKey API -> Data Key (Envelope Key) -(Encrypts)> Your Data

    Decryption Process:
    Data Key + Your Data -> KMS API to Decrypt Key -> Data Key decrypts data

Why Envelope Encryption?
    Why not encrypt the data using the CMK directly?
        Network: When you encrypt data directly with KMS it must be transferred over the network.

        Performance: With Envelope ENcryption only the data key goes over the newtork, not your data.

        Benefits: THe data key is used locally in your application or aws service, avoiding the need to transfer data.

KMS Summary
    Set Up Customer Master Key (CMK)
        Create alias and description, choose key material option
    Key Adminsistrative Permissions
        IAM users and roles that can adminnister (but not use) the key through the KMS API
    Key Usage Permissions  
        IAM users and roles that can use the key to encrypt and decrypt the data
    KMS Components
        AWS-Managed CMK: AWS-provieded and AWS-managed CMK. Used on your behalf with the AWS services integrated with KMS
            CMKs in your account that are created, managed, and used on your behalf by an AWS service that is integrated with AWS KMS.
        Customer-Managed CMK: You create, own and manage your self. Used to encrypt, decrypt files up to 4KB and generate the data key
        Data Key: Encryption key that you can use to encrypt data, including large amounts of data. You can use a CMK to generate, encrypt and decrypt data keys.
        Enevelope Encyrption: Encrypting the key that encrypts our data.
            The CMK is used to encrypt the data key (or envelope key)
            The data key encrypts our data.
            Used for encyrpting anything over 4KB
            By using envelope encryption this avoids sending all your data into KMS over the network

    KMS API Calls
        aws kms encrypt: Encrypts plaintext into ciphertext by using a customer master key.
        aws kms decrypt: Decrypts ciphertext that was encrypted by a customer master key
        aws kms re-encrypt: Decryptes ciphertext and then reencrypts using a CMK that you specify.
        aws kms enable-key-rotation: Enables automatic key rotation every 365 days
        aws kms generate-data-key: Uses the CMK to generate a data key to encrypt data using envelope encryption.

    